---
layout: note
title: 9. Security, privacy and data integrity
subject: computer_science
---
<u><b>Chapter 9: Security, privacy and data integrity</b></u>

## Terms:

- Data integrity: Data is accurate and up to date.
- Data privacy: Keeping data private. Data protection laws govern how data should be kept privatte and secure.
- Data security: Safeguarding data to provide Confidentiality, integrity and accessibility. 

## Threats to security

- Lack of proper care
- internal mismanagement
- natural disasters
- unauthorised intrusion
- malicious software

### Malware

> Malware or malicious software are developed with intent to harm.

- Types:
    - virus: Self replicating inside other executable code
    - worm: runs independently and transfers itself to other network hosts
    - logic bomb: inactive until some condition is met
    - trojan horse: replaces all or part of previously useful program. Hides in useful program.
    - spyware: collects and transmits it
    - bot: takes control of computer

- Activities:
    - Phishing: sending email pretending to be legitimate source
    - Pharming: setting up bogus/fake website that appears to be a legitimate site
    - Keylogger: Records keyboard usage by user

- User activities that lead to system vulnerability:
    - Weak password
    - Not recognising phising or pharming
    - Not keeping antivirus active and updated

- Vulnerability due to system itself:
    - Lack of security in OS
    - Macro virus with application packages
    - Buffer overflow and similar errors.(in C)

## Security measures

### For computer system:
- Disaster recovery
- Safe system update
- User authentication:
    - Autorization: Providing right to user
    - Authentication: Ensuring user is who he/she claims to be. Eg. Biometric, password etc.
- Firewall: Hardware/Software that inspects incoming and outgoing connections via network.
- Digital signature: Verifying identity of sender.
- Antivirus and intrusion detection.

### For protecting data:

- Backup
- Restricting access to data
- Protecting content(encryption and decryption)

## Data validation and verification

- Validation: Checking data is in required format during entry.
    - Ensuring not empty
    - Format check
    - length check
    - range check
    - limit check
    - type check
    - existence check(eg. for files)

- Verification: Making user confirm that data entered was what was intented to be entered.
    - Double entry
    - Visual check before submission

- Check digit: For numbers during storage, some digits are calculated and stored with numbers. Verification is done while reading.

- Verification during data transfer:
    - Parity bit: One bit to ensure even/odd parity
    - Parity bytes + bits(2D parity): Can check and correct error
    - Checksum: Data is broken to blocks and sum is transmitted along with data.
    - Cyclic Redundancy check
    - Hamming code

---